# Finding Beauty After Trauma
## By Rivka Fleischman

This year has been hard for all of us. For many reasons. Some the same and some
different. Some of us lost loved ones. Some of us got sick and are living with
long term symptoms. Some of us lost our jobs. Some of us were isolated and
lonely for many months. Some of us lived with incredible fear of the unknown for
many months.

Healing from trauma isn’t about forgetting what happened - when something hurts
enough, there is no forgetting. It follows you around and haunts you, regardless
of if you want it there or not. Forever, it will be a part of you. 

“Grieving is how we experience the process of a very, very deep part of our
psyches becoming familiar with a painful truth.”
-Valentine

And healing from trauma is about grieving the hurt. It’s about processing the
sadness, loss, and fear. 

Sit for a minute with yourself. Notice the sadness, loss, and fear within you.
Notice the pain you’ve been through. Notice what you’re needing to grieve for. 

Grieving from trauma isn’t enough. It’s the first step to healing. The second
step is finding meaning in the trauma. That doesn’t mean believing that the hurt
was a good thing. Because no hurt is a good thing.

Kintsugi is a form of Japanese art where broken pottery is glued together to
create a piece with imperfections. A beautiful piece of art made from broken
shards. The beauty is not in the broken shards - it’s in how the pieces were put
back together. 

This year, we’ve become broken pottery. The turmoil and pain of the pandemic has
broken us into small shards. Take a minute to sit with yourself. To notice the
shards of yourself. 

Beauty is not in our trauma - it’s in the way we put ourselves back together and
in the person we’ve become.

Winter Solstice is about seeing the darkness in the world and facing it. But
when things are dark enough, the pain, fear, and hurt can be overwhelming and
prevent us from acting. It can prevent us from truly facing the darkness. This
year, Solstice is about sitting with and healing from that pain. Together. 
