# Joseph Rotblat on the Development of Nuclear Weapons

Narrator: In 1939, Joseph Rotblat, a Polish nuclear physicist, was
working in England. He became concerned that it might be possible to
develop an atomic bomb, and went to consult with Ludwik Wertenstein,
his former supervisor in Poland, when home for a visit. Here’s how he
later described the results of the visit:

Rotblat: The idea of a nuclear weapon had not occurred to him, but
when I showed him my calculations, he could not find anything
scientifically wrong with them. On the moral issue, however, he was
unwilling to advise me. He himself would never engage in this type of
work, but he would not try to influence me. It had to be left to my
own conscience.

The war broke out two days after I returned to Liverpool. Within a few
weeks Poland was overrun. The stories that Hitler’s military strength
was all bluff, that his tanks were painted cardboard, turned out to be
wishful thinking. The might of Germany stood revealed, and the whole
of our civilization was in mortal peril. My scruples were finally
overcome.

Narrator: Rotblat began leading a laboratory in Liverpool where he
conducted experiments to determine the feasibility of building a
uranium bomb. Eventually he, along with several other physicists
working in Britain, joined the Manhattan Project in Los Alamos.

Rotblat: In March 1944 I experienced a disagreeable shock…. During one
[casual] conversation, [the general in charge of the project] said
that, of course, the real purpose in making the bomb was to subdue the
Soviets. (Whatever his exact words, his real meaning was clear.) While
I had no illusions about the Stalin regime—after all, it was his pact
with Hitler that enabled the latter to invade Poland—I felt deeply the
sense of betrayal of an ally. Remember, this was said at a time when
thousands of Russians were dying every day on the Eastern Front, tying
down the Germans and giving the Allies time to prepare for a landing
on the continent of Europe. Until then I had thought that our work was
to prevent a Nazi victory, and now I was told that the weapon we were
preparing was intended for use against the people who were making
extreme sacrifices for that very aim. [...]

When it became evident, toward the end of 1944, that the Germans had
abandoned their bomb project, the whole purpose of my being in Los
Alamos ceased to be, and I asked for permission to leave and return to
Britain. [...]

Work on the atom bomb convinced me that even pure research soon finds
application of one kind or another. If so, I wanted to decide myself
how my work should be applied. I chose an aspect of nuclear physics
which I knew would definitely be beneficial to humanity: the
applications to medicine. Thus I completely changed the direction of
my research and spent the rest of my academic career working in a
medical college and hospital.

While this gave me personal satisfaction, I was increasingly concerned
about the political aspects of the development of nuclear weapons,
particularly the hydrogen bomb.
