# Stonehenge Story
## By Raymond Arnold

[Note: Ray has complicated feelings about this speech, because some of the
facts about Stonehenge may not be accurate.]

The Winter Solstice is the longest night of the year. It ushers in a time of
cold and darkness. 

It marks the beginning of the light’s return. But it is not the end of the
cold.  For months afterwards, food is scarce and life is fragile. 

For young civilizations, it was a time when if you hadn’t spent the year
preparing adequately for the future, then before spring returned, you would run
out of food and die. If you hadn’t striven to use your tribe’s collective
wisdom, to work hard beyond what was necessary for immediate gratification… if
you hadn’t harnessed the physical and mental tools that humans have but that
few other animals do…

 ...then the universe, unflinchingly neutral, would destroy you without a
thought. And even if you did do those things, you might die anyway. Fairness
isn’t built into the equations of the cosmos.

But it wasn’t just the threat of death that inspired the first winter holidays.
It was that sense of unfairness, coupled with the desperate hope that the world
couldn’t really be that unfair. It wouldn’t have occurred to the first
squirrels that stored food for winter, but it gradually dawned upon ancient
hominids, as their capacity for abstract reasoning developed, alongside their
desire to throw parties. 

Our tendency is to anthropomorphize. Since ancient times, we’ve seen faces in
the clouds. Today, we angrily yell at our cars and computers when they fail us.
Rationally we know they are unthinking hulks of metal, but we still ascribe
malevolence when the real culprit is a broken, unsentient machine. For whatever
reason, animals of all kinds have a tendency to see patterns in the noise, even
when no patterns exist. There is a natural yearning to find meaning in
complexity. 

One way or another, we told stories about gods with human motivations. And we
honestly believed them, because there was nothing better. Many natural forces
were just too complex for early humans to be good at predicting. The rain would
come, or it wouldn’t, no matter what stories we told.

And then, we had the solstice. 

The world was dark and cold. The sun was retreating, leaving us only with the
pale moon and stars that lay unimaginably far away. There was the encroaching
threat of death, and just as powerfully, there was the threat that sentient
cosmic forces that held supreme power over our world were turning their backs
on us. And the best we could hope for was to throw a celebration in their honor
and pray that they wouldn’t be angry forever, that the sun would return and the
world would be reborn. 

And regardless, take a moment to be glad for having worked hard the previous
year, so that we had meat stored up and wine that had finished fermenting. 

But as ages passed, people noticed something interesting: there was a pattern
to the gods getting angry. Weather may be complex and nigh-unpredictable. But
the movements of the heavens… they follow rules simple enough for human minds
to understand, if only you take the time to look. 

We had a question. “When will the sun retreat, and when will it return?”

When you really care about knowing the answer, you can’t make something up.
When you need to plan your harvest and prepare for winter so that your family
doesn’t starve, you can’t just say “Oh, God will stop getting angry in a few
months.” 

If you want real knowledge, that you can apply to make your world better, then
you need to do science. Astronomy was born. 

I want to give you some perspective on how much we cared about this. Stonehenge
is an ancient archaeological wonder. To the best of our knowledge, it began as
a burial site around 3000 BCE. Over the next thousand years, it was gradually
built, in major phases of activity every few hundred years. Between 2600 and
2400 BCE, there was a surge of construction. Huge stones were carted over huge
distances, to create a monument that’s lasted five thousand years. 

Thirty Sarsen stones, each twenty-five tons, carried over twenty five miles.
Eighty bluestones. Four tons each. Each of them carried over one hundred and
fifty miles. All of this, in an era where the height of locomotive technology
was “throw it on a pile of logs and roll it.” 

We don’t know exactly how they did all this. We don’t know all the reasons why.
But we know at least one. The megaliths at Stonehenge are arranged, very
specifically, to predict the Solstice to the moment of dawn. 

Thirty Sarsen stones, each twenty-five tons, carried over twenty five miles.
Eighty bluestones, each four tons, each carried over one hundred and fifty
miles. 

Two hundred years years of that. 

That’s how much we cared about the answer to that question.
